---
title: "Leaving Social Media for Good"
date: 2022-03-04
hero: /images/posts/writing-posts/linux-hero.jpg
description: Stop using the most toxic thing man ever created.
tags: [ "social media" ]
menu:
  sidebar:
    name: Leaving Social Media
    identifier: leaving-social-media
    parent: productivity
    weight: 500
---

In my humble opinion, the way modern social media is being used can't be more
toxic. We don't really engage, have fun, or learn. You waste hours of your
lifetime doing nothing but scroll through endless stream of meaningless
content. Human lives should be wasted on nothing like this. I won't be talking
about ***why to leave***, you are here because you already want to leave.

## Why it's so hard to leave

It is no secret that social media companies improve their products every single
day. A part of this improvement is the time consumed on their platform, which
results in the countless hours the average social media user waste on these
places. Their goals is to make you always use their product, no matter your
mental state. You are happy? Let's share your happenings to the world! Sad?
Let's browse whatever may make you happy! And the list goes on. We are weak
humans with powerful lusts controlling us against huge corporates searching for
everything in the human nature to exploit it for their benefit, which is
unfortunately is harmful for us in this case.

## What we should do

The approach I use depends on the fundamental idea that humans have no self
control. The only thing that may prevent us from harming ourselves is how hard
it is. Thus, we shouldn't *try* to stop using social media; we should make
every social media platform we use **unusable**. The notion of having willpower
that could move the mountains is — more often than not — a fantasy. Humans
weren't created to do the hardest thing in front of them, quite the opposite,
the easiest possible thing they could think of. Conserving energy was the way
to go for survival for cavemen, so we were created to choose the path that
requires the least amount of energy. However, the modern life requires a lot of
energy wasted on things that cavemen are were not used to, and here the
conflict arises between our concious mind and our primal brain.

Fortunately, modern humans many ways to surpass our biological limits, and our
struggle with self control is no exception; I would recommend the book that I
am currently reading [Atomic Habits](https://jamesclear.com/atomic-habits)
since it tackles this aspect of human nature heavily. A rule of thumb for
modern humans, who seem to be disciplined, is eliminating whatever stands in
their way. We can't just have temptations hanging onto our eyes and ignore
them. Therefore, we just have to make it impossible to use social media during
our day-to-day life.

## We can't delete them

It is not like corporates don't know that they make our lives worse. They know,
and they know some will try to stop using their platforms, so they made it
harder to stop using their platform. Every lost user means less money. If you
try deactivating your Facebook account before, you would notice it is pretty
much useless, no change actually happened since you can as easily open it
again. Even the complete deletion of your account needs 30 days to be done,
which is a rather long time for a decision like this. The same for every other
major social media platform. They can't lose you, dear valuable user.

Additionally, many people have some legit uses for social media. It is just
sometimes unrepeatable. In these cases just the idea of deleting them is not
practical. Maybe you tried plugins like
[News Feed Eradicator](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/news-feed-eradicator/fjcldmjmjhkklehbacihaiopjklihlgg)
or
[DF YouTube](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/df-tube-distraction-free/mjdepdfccjgcndkmemponafgioodelna)
that hindered your harmful use for social media for a while, but after sometime
you have just disabled them. These plugins just adds a layer of resistance but
does not eliminate the use, which is better than nothing but certainly not the
solution.

## My solution

Based on what I have already mentioned, my solution was rather simple. Make
social media as unusable as possible. I will talk about how I done this with
Facebook and then you can apply similar stuff to other social media platforms.
Because they all are the same in core, it won't be that hard to apply the same
strategies on most of them. Maybe you feel this is a little bit overwhelming; if
you can't even start anything about it, just delete the apps from your phone,
this will increase the friction and this will be enough for a couple of days.

The main problem with Facebook is the feed of entities you follow. You won't be
wasting that much time on Facebook if there was no newsfeed, would you? Thus,
the solution was to unfollow everyone on Facebook. This may have been tedious
if not for the fact we can automate everything we can think of.
[This GitHub gist](https://gist.github.com/renestalder/c5b77635bfbec8f94d28)
will help you unfollow all the shit you follow on Facebook. To open the console
press `CTRL+SHIFT+I` and use the latest code found (at the end of the page)
since it is the one probably working. It is advised to read the script that you
are running and actually understanding it, don't just listen to whatever people
tell you. After this, you would literally be unable to use Facebook the way you
used to. Your newsfeed would be empty of anything, and you won't be able to
follow all the things that you used to since they are just too many and you
already don't remember half of them. Now, when you open Facebook you would find
nothing to do and close it after a couple of minutes instead of couple of hours.

However, there are some platforms where your main feed isn't who you follow, it
is what the algorithm recommends. In this case things are a little bit tricker,
just unfollowing/unsubscribing to everything won't cut it. Here, the only two
solutions is to either make it as hard as possible or just delete them. This was
what I have done with Instagram and YouTube. I have just deleted my Instagram
account (and somehow it was immediately deleted) and, after some time, created
new one. Now, I rarely use it and only open it from the browser on my desktop,
which isn't the nicest experience to have. The same for YouTube, just delete
your channel, all of your watch history, and thus your recommendations, are in
your channel, not your account. This would make your recommendations more dull,
and ultimately making the experience way more much undesirable without deleting
the undeletable super important Google account.

## Recommendations

Other things I have heard, but did not try myself that I think may also work:-
* Giving the passwords of your social media accounts to a trusted person and
  telling them to change the passwords; you will have to actively tell the
  person to give you the password, which will make it much harder.
* Make a different account on your system with your social media accounts
  logged in and log out from your main work account and delete the passwords
  (have a password only available on the social media account to access them),
  this will make you consciously choose to open social media and stop working by
  *restarting* the machine.
